May Zeus who guards suppliants look graciously upon our company, which boarded a ship and put to sea from the outlets of the fine sand of the
whose pastures border
It was Danaus, our father, adviser and leader, who, considering well our course, decided, as the best of all possible evils, that we flee with all speed over the waves of the sea
and find a haven on
could we come with these wool-wreathed branches in our hands, sole weapons of the suppliant? O realm, O land, and clear water;  gods on high and earth-bound powers, grievous in your vengeance,
which inhabit the tomb; and you, Zeus the Savior, invoked third
the thronging swarm of violent men born of
and perish by the tempest’s buffeting blasts, if they ever lay their hands on us, their cousins, and mount unwilling beds from which Right holds them aloof.
And now I invoke, as our champion from beyond the sea, the calf born of Zeus, the offspring of the flower-grazing cow, our ancestress,
the caress of Zeus’ breath. The appointed period confirmed itself in a name suited to the event—Epaphus
To him I cry for help.
And now in the region wherein our first mother pastured, by recounting the story of her distress of long ago, I shall now set forth reliable proofs to the inhabitants of the land;
and other evidence, though unexpected, will yet appear.  Men will come to know the truth as my tale proceeds.
Now if by chance there be some neighbor in the land who knows the song of birds,
when our complaint greets his ear, he will fancy that he hears the voice of Metis, Tereus’ piteous wife, the hawk-chased nightingale.
For she, constrained to leave her green leaves, laments pitifully her accustomed haunts,
and composes the tale of her own child’s doom—how he perished, destroyed by her own hand, victim of the wrath of an unnatural mother.
Even so I, indulging my grief in Ionian strains,
pain my tender face summered by
which has fled from the haze-shrouded land.
But, gods of our race, hear, and regard with favor the cause of righteousness; if you refuse youth
fulfillment of its arrogant desires, and readily abhor violence, you would be righteous toward marriage. Even for those who flee hard-pressed from war there is an altar,
a shelter against harm through respect for the powers of heaven.
But may Zeus grant that it go well with us.  For Zeus’ desire is hard to trace:  it shines everywhere, even in gloom, together with fortune
obscure to mortal men.
Safely it falls, and not upon its back, whatever deed comes to pass at Zeus’ nod; for the pathways of his understanding stretch dark and tangled,
beyond comprehension.
From their high-towering hopes he hurls mankind to utter destruction; yet he does not marshal any armed violence—
all that is wrought by the powers divine is free from toil.  Seated on his holy throne, unmoved, in mysterious ways he accomplishes his will.
So let him look upon human outrageousness
—in what way it shoots up men in their wooing of us, sprouted from thoughts of evil intent,
having a frenzied purpose as its irresistible spur, and deluded, turning its thoughts to folly.
Such piteous strains of woe I utter in my pain, now shrill, now deep, blended with falling tears—Alas, alas!
groans appropriate to funeral wails; though I live, I chant my own dirge.
I invoke
and many times I lay my hands upon my Sidonian veil and tear its linen fabric to shreds.
Sacrifices in satisfaction of vows are given freely to the gods when all fares well, if only there be escape from death.
Alas, alas, perplexing troubles!  Where will this wave of trouble bear me away?
I invoke
well, O land, you understand my barbarous speech—, and many times I lay my hands upon my Sidonian veil and tear its linen fabric to shreds.
Our oars, indeed, and our timbered ship, bound with yellow rope
to withstand the sea, sped me on by help of favoring winds, unharmed by all tempests; nor have I reason for complaint.  But may the all-seeing Father
establish a kindly issue in due time—
That the mighty race of our honorable mother escape the embrace of man (ah me), unwedded, unvanquished.
And may Zeus’ pure daughter, she who holds securely the sacred wall, willingly, meeting my will, look upon me; and, grieved at our pursuit, come with all her might, a virgin to a virgin’s aid,
to deliver me—
That the mighty race of our honorable mother may escape the embrace of man (ah me), unwedded, unvanquished.
Yet, if she will not, we, a dark,
sun-burned race, with suppliant boughs will invoke the underworld Zeus, Zeus the great host
of the dead; for if the gods of
Ah Zeus! On account of the poisonous hate of Io vengeance from the gods pursues us.
your consort’s sky-conquering spite; for a stormy sea  follows a harsh wind.
And Zeus shall then be liable to the charge of injustice
that he hates the child of the heifer, the child whom he himself begat long ago, his very own, and now he holds his face averted from our prayers.
May he from above hear our call!
Ah Zeus! On account of the poisonous hate of Io vengeance from the gods pursues us. I know
your consort’s sky-conquering spite; for a stormy sea  follows a harsh wind.
My children, you must be prudent.  A prudent captain of your voyage was your reliable old father here with whom you came.  And now that I have considered with foresight what may befall us here on land, I charge you, record my injunctions on the tablets of your minds and guard them.
I see dust, the voiceless herald of an army; the axle-driven wheels are not silent in their sockets. I behold a throng, armed with shields and holding spears, with steeds and curved chariots. Perhaps they are the princes of the land
come to look on us, informed by messengers.  But whether a harmless man or one driven by savage wrath rouses this expedition, it is better, damsels, in any case, to seat yourselves at that mound sacred to the assembled gods.
Stronger than a castle is an altar—an impenetrable shield.  As quick as you can, gather in your left hands your white-wreathed suppliant boughs, sacred emblems of Zeus the merciful.
Reply to the strangers, as is fitting for aliens, in piteous and plaintive language of necessity, telling them clearly of your flight, how it was unstained by deed of blood. Above all let no arrogance accompany your speech, and reveal nothing impious in your peaceful eyes, from your respectful face.
In your  speech neither interrupt, nor hesitate—for this would offend these people. And remember to be submissive: you are an alien, a fugitive, and in need.  Bold speech does not suit the weak.
Father, your words are prudent, and they fall on prudent ears.
I will take heed of your wise words, and hold them in memory.  May Zeus, the author of our race, behold us!
May he indeed behold you, and with a gracious eye.
I would like even now to be seated by your side.
Then do not delay, but put your purpose into action.
O Zeus, have pity upon our troubles lest we are ruined.
If he wishes it so, all will end well.

Invoke now also that bird of Zeus
We invoke the saving beams of the sun.
Pure Apollo, too, who, though a god, was exiled once from heaven.
Knowing our lot, he may well have pity on mortals.
May he have pity indeed, and stand by ready to defend.
Whom, further, of these divinities must I invoke?
I behold a trident here, the token of its god.
Well did he send us here and well may he receive us in this land.
Here, too, is Hermes, according to the Hellenic custom.
May he then announce good tidings to the free!
Honor to the mutual altar of all these protecting powers; and seat yourselves on holy ground like a flock of doves in dread of hawks of the same feathered tribe—
kindred, yet foes, who would defile their race.  If bird prey on bird, how can it be pure?  And how can man be pure who would seize from an unwilling father an unwilling bride?  For such an act, not even in Hades, after death, shall he escape arraignment for outrage.
There also among the dead, so men tell, another Zeus holds a last judgment upon misdeeds.  Take heed and reply in this manner, that victory may attend your cause.
From where comes this band we address,
clothed in foreign attire and luxuriating in closely-woven and barbaric robes?  For your apparel is not that of the women of
this makes me wonder.  And yet, truly, I see that branches usually carried by suppliants are laid by your side before the gods assembled here—as to this alone can
if your voice were not here to inform me.
You have not spoken falsely about our clothing. But, for my part, how am I to address you?  As commoner, as spokesman, bearer of the sacred wand,
As for that, answer and speak to me with confidence.
For I am Pelasgus, offspring of Palaechthon, whom the earth brought forth, and lord of this land; and after me, their king, is rightly named the race of the Pelasgi, who harvest the land.  Of all the region through which the pure
Strymon flows, on the side toward the setting sun, I am the lord.  There lies within the limits of my rule the land of the Perrhaebi, the parts beyond Pindus close to the Paeonians, and the mountain ridge of
The ground where we stand is Apian land itself, and has borne that name since antiquity in honor of a healer.  For Apis, seer and healer, the son of Apollo, came from
defiled by the pollution of bloody deeds of old, caused to spring up—plagues charged with wrath, an ominous colony of swarming serpents.  Of these plagues Apis worked the cure by sorcery and spells to the content of the
and for reward thereafter earned for himself remembrance in prayers.
Our tale is brief and clear.  Argives
we claim to be by birth, offspring of a cow blest in its children.  And the truth of this I shall confirm in full.
Foreign maidens, your tale is beyond my belief—how your race can be from
women of
ride on camels for steeds, having padded saddles, and dwell in a land neighboring the Aethiopians.  And had you been armed with the bow, certainly I would have guessed you to be the unwed, flesh-devouring Amazons.  But inform me, and I will better comprehend
how it is that you trace your race and lineage from
Is there a report that once in this land of
Certainly she was; the tradition prevails far and wide.
And is there some story, too, that Zeus was joined in love with a mortal?
This entanglement was not secret from Hera.
What then was the result of this royal strife?
The goddess of Argos transformed the woman into a cow.
And while she was a horned cow, did not Zeus approach her?
So they say, making his form that of a bull lusting for a mate.
What answer then did Zeus’ stubborn consort give?
She placed the all-seeing one to stand watch over the cow.
What manner of all-seeing herdsman with a single duty do you mean?
Argus, a son of Earth, whom Hermes slew.
What else did she contrive against the unfortunate cow?
A sting, torment of cattle, constantly driving her on.
They call it a gadfly, those who dwell by the
Well then, it drove her by a long course out of the land.
Your account agrees with mine in all respects.
So she came to
And Zeus begot a son by the touching of his hand.
Who is it then that claims to be the cow’s Zeus-begotten calf?
Epaphus, and truly named from




And who was his offspring?
Belus, who had two sons and was father of my father here.
Now tell me his wisely-given name.
Danaus: and he has a brother with fifty sons.
Reveal his name ungrudgingly.

I think you indeed have some share in this land from old. But how did you bring yourselves to leave the home of your fathers? What stroke of fortune befell you?
Lord of the Pelasgians, of varying color are the ills of mankind, and nowhere can you find trouble of the same plume.
For who dreamed that a kindred race, sprung of old, would thus in unexpected flight find haven at
Why have you come as suppliants of these gods congregated here, holding in your hands those white-wreathed, fresh-plucked boughs?
So as not to be made slave to
By reason of hatred?  Or do you speak of unlawfulness ?
Who would purchase their lords from among their kin?
In this way families have enhanced their power.
And it is easy then, if things go ill, to separate from a wife.
How then am I to deal with you in accordance with my sacred duty?
By not surrendering us at the demand of
A serious request—to take upon myself a dangerous war.
But Justice protects her champions.
True, if she had a share in the matter from the beginning.
Show reverence for the ship of state thus crowned.
I shrink as I gaze upon these shaded shrines.
Yet heavy is the wrath of Zeus, god of the suppliant.
I see
a company of assembled gods assenting beneath the shade of fresh-plucked boughs.  Nevertheless may this affair of claimants to the friendship of our city bring no mischief in its wake!  And let no feud come upon the state from causes unforeseen and unforestalled; for the state has no need of such trouble.
Indeed,
may Justice, daughter of Zeus the Apportioner, Justice who protects the suppliant, look upon our flight that it bring no mischief in its wake.  But you, aged in experience, learn from one of younger birth.  If you show mercy to a suppliant ... from a man of holiness.
It is not my own house at whose hearth you sit.  If the state is stained by pollution in its commonalty, in common let the people strive to work out the cure.  For myself, I will pledge no promise before I have communicated these events to all the citizens.
You are the state, you are the people.  Being subject to no judge, you rule the altar, your country’s hearth by your will’s sole ordinance; and, enthroned in sole sovereignty,
you determine every issue.  Beware pollution!
Pollution on my enemies!  But without harm I do not know how to help you.  And yet again, it is not well advised to slight these supplications.  I am perplexed, and fear possesses my soul
whether to act, or not to act and take what fortune sends.
Look to him who looks down from above, to him, the guardian of mortals sore-distressed, who appeal to their neighbors, yet do not obtain the justice that is their right.
The wrath of Zeus, the suppliant’s god, remains, and will not be softened by a sufferer’s complaints.
If the sons of
You must plead in accordance with the laws of the land you have fled, that they have no authority over you.
Never, oh never, may I fall subject to the power and authority of these men.  I am determined to flee to escape this marriage that offends my soul, piloting my course by the stars.
Take Justice as your ally, and render judgment for the cause deemed righteous by the gods.
The judgment is not easy—do not make me the judge.  I have declared already that, though I am ruler, I will not do this thing without the consent of my people, lest hereafter,
if any evil befall, the people should say,
Kindred to both in blood, Zeus surveys both sides alike in this dispute with an impartial scale, apportioning, as is due, to the wicked their wrongdoing and to the godly their works of righteousness.
When these things are thus equally balanced, why do you fear to act justly?
Surely there is need of deep and salutary counsel; need for a keen-sighted eye, not confused, to descend, like some diver, into the depths;
that to the state above all things this matter may not work mischief, but may end well for us; that strife may not seize you for its prize, nor yet that we surrender you from these seats of sanctuary,
and bring upon ourselves the dire, abiding vengeance of the all-destroying god, who, even in the realm of Death, does not set his victim free.  Surely you cannot think there is no need of salutary counsel?
Take counsel, and, as is your sacred duty, prove yourself our sacred
champion.  Do not betray the fugitive who has been impiously cast out and driven from afar.
I have considered them; and I am driven to this cruel predicament. I must take upon myself a mighty war against one side or the other.
There is no escape, it is as firmly fixed as a ship’s hull drawn tight by windlasses.  There is no result without grievous hurt. Now when goods are plundered from a homestead,
other goods may come by grace of Zeus, guardian of household wealth; as a tongue that has shot arrows beside the mark, one speech may be the healer of another.  But to avoid the shedding of kindred blood,
surely there is need of sacrifice and that many a victim fall to many a god as a deliverance from impending harm.  For truly, it is to my undoing that I have come into this quarrel; and yet I prefer to be unskilled rather than practised in the lore of foretelling ill.  But may my judgment belie itself and all go well!
Hear now the end of my appeals for compassion.
I hear; say on.  It shall not escape me.
I have breast-bands and girdles to gather up my robes.
Such things are proper, no doubt, for women.
In these then, be sure, I have a beautiful instrument—
Tell me what speech you plan to utter.
If you will not give some pledge to this group—
What will the contrivance of the sashes do for you?
To adorn these images with tablets of strange sort.
Your words are riddling; come, explain in simple speech.
To hang ourselves from the statues of these gods.
I detect a threat that is a lash upon my heart.
You have grasped my intention, for I have cleared your vision.
And on many sides there are difficulties hard to wrestle with; for, like a flood, a multitude of ills bursts on me.
It is a sea of ruin, fathomless and impassable, which I am launched upon, and nowhere is there a haven from distress.  For should I not pay the debt due to you, the pollution you name is beyond all range of speech; yet if
I take my stand before the walls and try the issue of battle with the sons of
Aged father of these maidens, take these boughs straightway in your arms and place them upon other altars of the country’s gods, that all the natives may see the sign that you have come in suppliance.  And let no random word fall against
me; for the people could complain against authority.  It may well be that some, stirred to compassion at the sight, will hate the wantonness of the troop of males, and that the people will be more friendly towards you; for  all men are well disposed to the weaker cause.
We consider it worth much to have gained a champion who is compassionate.  Yet send escorts and guides of the country’s people with me so we may find where the gods who protect your city have their altars at the temple porches and their . . . seats,
and that we may go safely through the town.  My shape is unlike yours, for
Come, men, the stranger speaks well.  Be his guides to the altars of the city and to the sanctuaries of the gods.   Do not speak at length with whomever you meet on the way while you are bringing this seafarer to be a suppliant at the hearths of the gods.
You told him, and let him go as directed.
But what of me? What am I to do?  Where do you assign security to me?
Leave your boughs here, tokens of your distress.
Behold, I leave them at your signal and command.
Go now along this level space about the sanctuary.
But it is not holy ground.  How can it keep me safe?
Be assured, we will not surrender you to winged creatures’ ravishment.
But what about those whom we dread worse than evil serpents?
Speak with good omen, as I have spoken auspiciously to you.
No wonder I am fretful through alarm of mind.
Excessive fear is always uncontrolled.
Cheer my heart by deeds as well as words.
Your father will not leave you here alone for long.  I am going now to call together the people of the land, that I may make the masses friendly; and I will instruct your father in what things he should say.
Now stay here and beseech the gods of the land with prayers to grant what you desire, while I go to advance your cause.  May persuasion and efficacious fortune attend me!
Lord of lords,
most blessed among the blessed, power most perfect among the perfect, O blessed Zeus, hear! And from your offspring ward off in utter abhorrence the lust of men, and into the purple sea cast
their black-benched madness!
Look benignly upon the women’s cause, look upon our race ancient in story, and recall the happy tale of our ancestress, the woman of your love.
Show that you remember all, you who laid your hand upon Io.  It is from Zeus that we claim descent, and it is from this, our homeland, that we went forth.
I have come here to the prints of ancient feet, my mother’s, even to the region where she was watched while she browsed among the flowers—
into that pasture, from which Io, tormented by the gad-fly’s sting, fled in frenzy, traversing many tribes of men, and
according to fate, cut in two the surging strait, marking off the land upon the farther shore.
And through the land of
and the hollow vales of
the land of Aphrodite that teems with wheat.
Harassed by the sting of the winged herdsman she gains at last the fertile groves sacred to Zeus, that snow-fed pasture assailed
by Typho’s fury, and the water of the
And mortals, who in those days dwelled in the land, shook with pallid terror at the terrible sight as they beheld a being fearsome, half-human, part cow
and part of woman; and they were astonished at the monstrous thing.  And then, at last, who was it who calmed the far-wandering, the wretched, the sting-tormented Io?
Zeus, it was, through endless time, the lord,
. . . and by the unharming might of his hand, and by his divine breath, she gained rest, and let fall the sorrowing shame of tears.
And, taking Zeus as her support, according to a true story, she bore a blameless son—
Throughout long ages blessed.  All the earth cries aloud,
Which of the gods has accomplished deeds which, with good reason, warrant more justly my appeal to him?  Father himself and lord, he planted us with his own hand; he is the mighty fashioner of our race, ancient in wisdom, who devises everything, whose breath makes all things prosper, Zeus himself.
He does not sit upon his throne by mandate of another and hold his dominion beneath a mightier. No one sits above him whose power he holds in awe.  He speaks, and it is done—he hastens to execute whatever his counselling mind conceives.
Be of good cheer, my children, all goes well on the part of the citizens.  Decrees, carrying full authority, have been passed.
Hail, our envoy, harbinger of tidings most welcome, But tell us—to what end has the decision been carried, and to what course does the majority of the people’s votes incline?
Action was taken by the Argives, not by any doubtful vote but in such a way as to make my aged heart renew its youth.  For the air bristled with right hands held aloft as, in full vote, they ratified this resolution into law:
Such was the persuasive speech that the king of the Pelasgians delivered on our behalf, uttering the solemn warning that never in the future should the city feed the great wrath of Zeus, protector of the suppliant; and declaring  that, should a twofold defilement—from strangers and from natives at once—arise before the city,
it would become fodder for distress past all relief.  Hearing these words, the
Come, let us invoke blessings upon the Argives in return for blessings.  And may Zeus, god of strangers, behold the offerings of gratitude voiced by a stranger’s lips, that they may in true fulfilment reach their perfect goal.
Divinely-born gods!  Hear now as I pour forth libations for blessings upon our kindred.  Never may the wanton lord of war,
insatiate of battle-cry, Ares, who reaps a human harvest in alien fields, destroy this Pelasgian land by fire; for they had compassion for us,
and cast a vote in our favor, respecting  our pitiable flock, suppliants in the name of Zeus.
Nor did they cast their votes for the side of the males,
disregarding the women’s cause, since they honored the avenging eye of Zeus, against which there is no battling, and what house would have it
defiling its roof?
altars shall they please the gods.
Therefore let there fly forth from our overshadowed
empty this city of its men nor strife stain the soil of the land with the blood of slain inhabitants.  But may the flower of its youth be unplucked, and may Ares,
the partner of Aphrodite’s bed, he who makes havoc of men, not shear off their bloom.
And may the altars, where the elders gather, blaze in honor of venerable men.
Thus may their state be regulated well, if they hold in awe mighty Zeus, and, most of all, Zeus the warden of the guest, who by venerable enactment guides destiny straight.
We pray that other guardians be always renewed, and that Artemis-Hecate
And let no murderous havoc come upon
the realm to ravage it, by arming Ares—foe to the dance and lute, parent of tears—and the shout of civil strife.
And may the joyless swarm of diseases settle far from the heads of the inhabitants, and to all the young people may Lyceus
May Zeus cause the earth to bring forth its tribute of fruit
by the produce of every season; may their grazing cattle in the fields have abundant increase, and may they obtain all things from the heavenly powers.
May minstrels sing hymns of praise at the altars; and from pure lips let there proceed the phorminx-loving chant.
May the people who control the state guard its privileges free from fear—
a prudent government counselling wisely for the public prosperity.  And should they have recourse to arms may they inflict no loss, but grant just rights of covenant to the stranger within their gates.
And may they worship forever the gods who possess the land
with native honors of laurel bough held aloft, and oxen slain, even as their fathers did before their time. Since reverence for parents stands written third among the statutes of Justice, to whom honor supreme is due.
I commend these sensible prayers, dear children; but do not be troubled yourselves when you hear the unexpected and startling tidings your father has to tell.  From my post of look-out here on the sanctuary of suppliants I see that ship; for it is well-marked and does not escape me:
the trimming of its sail, its side-guards, and the prow that with its eyes scans its onward course, obeying—all too well for those to whom it is unfriendly—the guiding rudder at the stern.  The men on board are plainly seen, their black
limbs showing from their white attire.  The rest of the ships and all the assisting fleet stand clear in view:  but the leading ship herself has furled her sail and draws near the shore with full sweep of sounding oars.  Yet
you must face the matter calmly and with self-control, and not be unmindful of these gods.  For my part, I will secure allies and advocates to urge our cause, and return.  Perhaps some herald or envoys may come, eager to seize you as a prize and drag you away, but nothing will happen: do not fear them.
Yet in the event that we should be slow in bringing aid, it would be better not to forget for a moment the means of help you have here at hand.  Courage! In good time, assuredly, and on the day ordained, he who dishonors the gods will suffer punishment.
Father, I am afraid. With what swift wings the ships
approach!  There is not much time left.
I am possessed by dreadful fear if truly my long flight has been of no profit.  Father, I am consumed with fright.
Since the vote of the Argives was final,
be of good cheer, my children; they will fight in your defence, I know this well.
But they will find here a force with arms well-seasoned by the noonday heat.
This would profit us well, my children, should they incur both Heaven’s hate and yours.
Yet there is a saying that wolves are stronger than dogs; the papyrus-fruit does not conquer the wheat-ear.
A fleet in getting under way is not so speedy,
nor yet in anchoring, when the securing cables must be brought ashore; and even at anchorage shepherds of ships do not feel immediately secure, above all if they have arrived on a harborless coast when the sun is sinking into night.
In a cautious pilot night is likely to beget anxiety.  Then, too, the disembarking of an army cannot be effected with success before a ship has gained confidence in her moorings.  But, for all your terror, remember not to neglect the gods.
old in years, but with youth in his heart and on his tongue.
O land of hills, land of our righteous veneration, what is to be our lot?  To what region in the Apian land are we to flee, if anywhere there be some dark hiding-place?  Ah that I might become black smoke
that draws near to the clouds of Zeus; or, soaring aloft without wings, vanish out of sight like viewless dust and dissolve into nothingness!
The evil is no longer escapable;
my heart is darkened and trembling; the look-out my father held has brought me ruin.  I am undone with terror. Rather would I meet my doom in a noose
than suffer the embraces of a man I loathe.  Death before that, with Hades for my lord and master!
Ah that somewhere in the upper air I might find a seat against which the dank clouds turn into snow, or some bare, inaccessible crag,
beyond sight, brooding in solitude, beetling, vulture-haunted, to bear witness to my plunge into the depths before I am ever forced into a marriage that would pierce my heart!
Thereafter I refuse not to become a booty for dogs and a banquet for the local birds; for death is freedom from misery-loving evils.  Come death, death be my doom,
before the marriage-bed!  How can I yet find some means of escape to deliver me from marriage?
Shriek aloud, with a cry that reaches heaven, strains of supplication to the gods;
O father, give heed that they  are somehow accomplished to my safety and tranquility.  Behold deeds of violence with no kind glance in your just eyes!
Have respect for your suppliants, O Zeus, omnipotent upholder of the land!
For the males of the race of
a fugitive, with clamorous lewdness and seek to lay hold of me with violence.  But yours alone is the beam of the balance, and without you what is accomplished for mortals?
Wail and shout and call upon the gods—you will not escape the Egyptian ship.
Cry out, utter a strain of woe more bitter still.
Go to the double-prowed ship as quickly as possible.  Let no one delay, for dragging by force has no mercy on locks of hair.
Alas, father; the help of the sacred images deludes me.  Like a spider, he is carrying me seaward step by step—a nightmare, a black nightmare! Oh! Oh!
Mother Earth, mother Earth, avert his fearful cries!  O father Zeus, son of Earth!
I do not fear the native gods, be assured. They did not rear me, nor by their nurture did they bring me to old age.
He rages close to me, the two-footed serpent. Like some viper he lays hold of me and bites my foot.  Alas, alas!  Mother Earth, mother Earth,
avert his fearful cries!  O father Zeus, son of Earth!
If you will not resign yourself and get to the ship, rending will have no pity on the fabric of your garments.
We are lost!  O King, we are suffering impious violence!

You there!  What are you doing?  What kind of arrogance has incited you to do such dishonor to this realm of Pelasgian men?  Indeed, do you think you have come to a land of women? For a barbarian dealing with Hellenes, you act insolently.
Many are the misses of your wits, and your hits are none.
And in this case where have I gone wrong and transgressed my right?
First of all, you do not know how to act as a stranger.
I not know?  How so, when I simply find and take my own that I had lost?
To what patrons of your land was your notice given?
To Hermes, the Searcher, greatest of patrons.
For all your notice to the gods, you do them no reverence.
I revere the deities by the
While ours are nothing, as I understand you?
I shall carry off these maids unless someone tears them away.
If you so much as touch them, you will regret it, and right soon.
I hear you; and your speech is far from hospitable.
No, since I have no hospitality for despoilers of the gods.
I will go and tell
My proud spirit will not ponder on this threat.
But that I may know and tell a plainer tale —for it is fitting that a herald make exact report on each detail—what message am I to deliver?  Who is it, am I to tell on my return, that has despoiled me of this band of women, their own cousins?  It is not, I suppose, by voice of witnesses that the god of battle judges cases like this;
nor is it by the gift of silver that he settles dispute; no! If that be the case, many a one shall fall and shuffle off his life.
In blessings may you abound, noble Pelasgian, in requital for your blessings!  But, if it pleases you, send our brave father Danaus here to be our adviser
and leader of our counsels.  For it befits him, rather than ourselves, to advise us where we should establish our home and what neighborhood is friendly.  All the world is ready to cast reproach on those who speak a foreign tongue.  But may all be for the best!
And you, dear handmaidens, preserving your fair fame and provoking no angry utterances on the part of the native folk, take up your stations even as Danaus has allotted her duty of attendance unto each.
My children, it is right to offer prayers to the Argives and to sacrifice and pour libations to them as to Olympian gods; for they are our saviors in no doubtful manner.  They heard from my lips the conduct of your cousins toward their own kinfolk, and were moved to bitterness against them;
but to me they assigned this escort of spearmen, that I might have rank and honor, and might not be ambushed and perish by the death of the spear, and so an ever-living burden come upon the land.  Recipients of such favors as these,
it becomes us to hold gratitude in yet higher honor from the bottom of our hearts.  And in addition to the many other wise injunctions of your father recorded in your memory, inscribe this too—that an unknown company is proved by time.  For in an alien’s case, all the world bears an evil tongue in readiness,
and it is easy lightly to utter  defiling slander.  Therefore I would have you bring no shame upon me, now when your youthful loveliness attracts men’s gaze. The tender ripeness of summer fruit is in no way easy to protect; beasts despoil it—and men, why not?—
and brutes that fly and those that walk the earth.  Love’s goddess spreads news abroad of fruit bursting ripe. . . . So all men, as they pass,
mastered by desire, shoot an alluring arrow of the eye at the delicate beauty of virgins.  See to it, therefore, that we do not suffer that in fear for which we have endured great toil and ploughed the great waters with our ship; and that we bring no shame to ourselves and exultation to our enemies. Housing of two kinds is at our disposition,
the one Pelasgus offers, the other, the city, and to occupy free of cost.  These terms are easy.  Only pay heed to these behests of your father, and count your chastity more precious than your life.
May the Olympian gods grant us good fortune in all the rest!
But, concerning the bloom of my virginity, father, be of good cheer, for, unless some evil has been devised of Heaven, I will not swerve from the former pathway of my thoughts.
Come now away, glorifying the blessed gods, lords of the city both those who guard the town
and those who dwell about Erasinus’ ancient stream. And you handmaidens take up the song.  Let the theme of our praise be this city of the Pelasgians, and no longer
let the homage of our hymns be paid to
But to the rivers that pour their gentle draught through the land and increase the birth of children, soothing its soil with their fertilizing streams.
May pure Artemis look upon this band in compassion, and may marriage never come through Cytherea’s compulsion.  May that prize belong to my enemies!
