The gods I ask deliverance from these labours,
Watch of a year’s length whereby, slumbering through it
On the Atreidai’s roofs on elbow, — dog-like —
I know of nightly star-groups the assemblage,
And those that bring to men winter and summer
Bright dynasts, as they pride them in the aether
— Stars, when they wither, and the uprisings of them.
And now on ward I wait the torch’s token,
The glow of fire, shall bring from
And word of capture: so prevails audacious
The man’s-way-planning hoping heart of woman.
But when I, driven from night-rest, dew-drenched hold to
This couch of mine — not looked upon by visions,
Since fear instead of sleep still stands beside me,
So as that fast I fix in sleep no eyelids —
And when to sing or chirp a tune I fancy,
For slumber such song-remedy infusing,
I wail then, for this House’s fortune groaning,
Not, as of old, after the best ways governed.
Now, lucky be deliverance from these labours,
At good news — the appearing dusky fire!
O hail, thou lamp of night, a day-long lightness
Revealing, and of dances the ordainment!
Halloo, halloo!
To Agamemnon’s wife I show, by shouting,
That, from bed starting up at once, i’ the household
Joyous acclaim, good-omened to this torch-blaze,
She send aloft, if haply
Be taken, as the beacon boasts announcing.
Ay, and, for me, myself will dance a prelude,
For, that my masters’ dice drop right, I’ll reckon:
Since thrice-six has it thrown to me, this signal.
Well, may it hap that, as he comes, the loved hand
O’ the household’s lord I may sustain with this hand!
As for the rest, I’m mute: on tongue a big ox
Has trodden. Yet this House, if voice it take should,
Most plain would speak. So, willing I myself speak
To those who know: to who know not — I’m blankness.
The tenth year this, since Priamos’ great match,
King Menelaos, Agamemnon King,
— The strenuous yoke-pair of the Atreidai’s honour
Two-throned, two-sceptred, whereof Zeus was donor —
Did from this land the aid, the armament despatch,
The thousand-sailored force of Argives clamouring
Passion forth vultures which, because of grief
Away, — as are their young ones, — with the thief,
Lofty above their brood-nests wheel in ring,
Row round and round with oar of either wing,
Lament the bedded chicks, lost labour that was love:
Which hearing, one above
— Whether Apollon, Pan or Zeus — that wail,
Sharp-piercing bird-shriek of the guests who fare
Housemates with gods in air —
Suchanone sends, against who these assail,
What, late-sent, shall not fail
Of punishing — Erinus. Here as there,
The Guardian of the Guest, Zeus, the excelling one,
Sends against Alexandros either son
Of Atreus: for that wife, the many-husbanded,
Appointing many a tug that tries the limb,
While the knee plays the prop in dust, while, shred
To morsels, lies the spear-shaft; in those grim
Marriage-prolusions when their Fury wed
Danaoi and Troes, both alike. All’s said:
Things are where things are, and, as fate has willed,
So shall they be fulfilled.
Not gently-grieving, not just doling out
The drops of expiation — no, nor tears distilled —
Shall he we know of bring the hard about
To soft — that intense ire
At those mock rites unsanctified by fire.
But we pay nought here: through our flesh, age-weighed,
Left out from who gave aid
In that day, — we remain,
Staying on staves a strength
The equal of a child’s at length.
For when young marrow in the breast doth reign,
That’s the old man’s match, — Ares out of place
In either: but in oldest age’s case,
Foliage a-fading, why, he wends his way
On three feet, and, no stronger than a child,
Wanders about gone wild,
A dream in day.
Empowered am I to sing
The omens, what their force which, journeying,
Rejoiced the potentates:
(For still, from God, inflates
My breast song-suasion: age,
Born to the business, still such war can wage)
— How the fierce bird against the Teukris land
Despatched, with spear and executing hand,
The Achaian’s two-throned empery—o’er
Two rulers with one mind:
The birds’ king to these kings of ships, on high,
— The black sort, and the sort that’s white behind,  —
Appearing by the palace, on the spear-throw side,
In right sky-regions, visible far and wide, —
Devouring a hare-creature, great with young,
Baulked of more racings they, as she from whom they sprung!
Ah, Linos, say — ah, Linos, song of wail!
But may the good prevail!
I am come, reverencing power in thee,
O Klutaimnestra! For ’t is just we bow
To the ruler’s wife, — the male-seat man-bereaved.
But if thou, having heard good news, — or none, —
For good news’ hope dost sacrifice thus wide,
I would hear gladly: art thou mute, — no grudge!
Good-news-announcer, may — as is the by-word —
Morn become, truly, — news from Night his mother!
But thou shalt learn joy past all hope of hearing.
Priamos’ city have the Argeioi taken.
How sayest? The word, from want of faith, escaped me.

Joy overcreeps me, calling forth the tear-drop.
Right! for, that glad thou art, thine eye convicts thee.
For — what to thee, of all this, trusty token?
What’s here! how else? unless the god have cheated.
Haply thou flattering shows of dreams respectest?
No fancy would I take of soul sleep-burthened.
But has there Puffed thee up some unwinged omen?
As a young maid’s my mind thou mockest grossly.
Well, at what time was — even sacked, the city?
Of this same mother Night — the dawn, I tell thee.
And who of messengers could reach this swiftness?
Hephaistos — sending a bright blaze from Ide.
Beacon did beacon send, from fire the poster,
Hitherward: Ide to the rock Hermaian
Of
Zeus’ seat received in turn, the Athoan summit.
And, — so upsoaring as to stride sea over,
The strong lamp-voyager, and all for joyance —
Did the gold-glorious splendour, any sun like,
Pass on — the pine-tree — to Makistos’ watch-place;
Who did not, — tardy, — caught, no wits about him,
By sleep, — decline his portion of the missive.
And far the beacon’s light, on stream Euripos
Arriving, made aware Messapios’ warders,
And up they lit in turn, played herald onwards,
Kindling with flame a heap of grey old heather.
And, strengthening still, the lamp, decaying nowise,
Springing o’er Plain Asopos, — full-moon-fashion
Effulgent, — toward the crag of Mount Kithairon,
Roused a new rendering-up of fire the escort —
And light, far escort, lacked no recognition
O’ the guard — as burning more than burnings told you.
And over Lake Gorgopis light went leaping,
And, at Mount Aigiplanktos safe arriving,
Enforced the law —
And they send, lighting up with ungrudged vigour,
Of flame a huge beard, ay, the very foreland
So as to strike above, in burning onward,
The look-out which commands the Strait Saronic.
Then did it dart until it reached the outpost
Mount Arachnaios here, the city’s neighbour;
And then darts to this roof of the Atreidai
This light of Ide’s fire not unforefathered!
Such are the rules prescribed the flambeau-bearers:
He beats that’s first and also last in running.
Such is the proof and token I declare thee,
My husband having sent me news from
The gods, indeed, anon will I pray, woman!
But now, these words to hear, and sate my wonder
Thoroughly, I am fain — if twice thou tell them.

I think a noise — no mixture — reigns i’ the city.
Sour wine and unguent pour thou in one vessel —
Standers-apart, not lovers, wouldst thou style them:
And so, of captives and of conquerors, partwise
The voices are to hear, of fortune diverse.
For those, indeed, upon the bodies prostrate
Of husbands, brothers, children upon parents
— The old men, from a throat that ’s free no longer,
Shriekingly wail the death-doom of their dearest:
While these — the after-battle hungry labour,
Which prompts night-faring, marshals them to breakfast
On the town’s store, according to no billet
Of sharing, but as each drew lot of fortune.
In the spear-captured Troic habitations
House they already: from the frosts upmethral
And dews delivered, will they, luckless creatures,
Without a watch to keep, slumber all night through.
And if they fear the gods, the city-guarders,
And the gods’ structures of the conquered country,
They may not — capturers—soon in turn be captive.
But see no prior lust befall the army
To sack things sacred — by gain-cravings vanquished
For there needs homeward the return’s salvation,
To round the new limb back o’ the double race-course.
And guilty to the gods if came the army,
Awakened up the sorrow of those slaughtered
Might be — should no outbursting evils happen.
But may good beat — no turn to see i’ the balance!
For, many benefits I want the gain of.
Woman, like prudent man thou kindly speakest.
And I, thus having heard thy trusty tokens,
The gods to rightly hail forthwith prepare me;
For, grace that must be paid has crowned our labours.
The stroke of Zeus — they have it, as men say!
This, at least, from the source track forth we may!
As he ordained, so has he done.
That they do care, has been made plain
To offspring of the over-bold,
Outbreathing
Houses that spill with more than they can hold,
More than is best for man. Be man’s what must
Keep harm off, so that in himself he find
Sufficiency — the well-endowed of mind!
For there’s no bulwark in man’s wealth to him
Who, through a surfeit, kicks — into the dim
And disappearing — Right’s great altar.
Soon shall we know — of these light-bearing torches,
And beacons and exchanges, fire with fire —
If they are true, indeed, or if, dream-fashion,
This gladsome light came and deceived our judgment.
Yon herald from the shore I see, o’ershadowed
With boughs of olive: dust, mud’s thirsty brother,
Close neighbours on his garb, thus testify me
That neither voiceless, nor yet kindling for thee
Mountain-wood-flame, shall he explain by fire-smoke:
But either tell out more the joyance, speaking ..
Word contrary to which, I aught but love it!
For may good be — to good that’s known — appendage!
Whoever prays for aught else to this city
— May he himself reap fruit of his mind’s error!
Ha, my forefathers’ soil of earth Argeian!
Thee, in this year’s tenth light, am I returned to —
Of many broken hopes, on one hope chancing;
For never prayed I, in this earth Argeian
Dying, to share my part in tomb the dearest.
Now, hail thou earth, and hail thou also, sunlight,
And Zeus, the country’s lord, and king the Puthian
From bow no longer urging at us arrows!
Enough, beside Skamandros, cam’st thou adverse:
Now, contrary, be saviour thou and healer,
O king Apollon! And gods conquest-granting,
All — I invoke too, and my tutelary
Hermes, dear herald, heralds’ veneration, —
And Heroes our forthsenders, — friendly, once more
The army to receive, the war-spear’s leavings!
Ha, mansions of my monarchs, roofs beloved,
And awful seats, and deities sun-fronting —
Receive with pomp your monarch, long time absent!
For he comes bringing light in night-time to you,
In common with all these — king Agamemnon.
But kindly greet him — for clear shows your duty —
Who has dug under
Of Zeus the Avenger, whereby plains are out-ploughed,
Altars unrecognizable, and gods’ shrines,
And the whole land’s seed thoroughly has perished.
And such a yoke-strap having cast round
The elder king Atreides, happy man — he
Comes to be honoured, worthiest of what mortals
Now are. Nor Paris nor the accomplice-city
Outvaunts their deed as more than they are done-by:
For, in a suit for rape and theft found guilty,
He missed of plunder and, in one destruction,
Fatherland, house and home has mowed to atoms:
Debts the Priamidai have paid twice over.
Hail, herald from the army of Achaians!
I hail: — to die, will gainsay gods no longer!
Love of this fatherland did exercise thee?
So that I weep, at least, with joy, my eyes full.
What, of this gracious sickness were ye gainers?
How now? instructed, I this speech shall master.
For those who loved you back, with longing stricken.
This land yearned for the yearning army, say’st thou?
So as to set me oft, from dark mind, groaning.
Whence came this ill mind — hatred to the army?
Of old, I use, for mischiefs physic, silence.
And how, the chiefs away, did you fear any?
So that now, — late thy word, — much joy were — dying!
For well have things been worked out: these, — in much time,
Some of them, one might say, had luck in falling,
While some were faulty: since who, gods excepted,
Goes, through the whole time of his life, ungrieving?
For labours should I tell of, and bad lodgments,
Narrow deckways ill-strewn, too, — what the day’s woe
We did not groan at getting for our portion?
As for land-things, again, on went more hatred!
Since beds were ours hard by the foemen’s ramparts,
And, out of heaven and from the earth, the meadow
Dews kept a-sprinkle, an abiding damage
Of vestures, making hair a wild-beast matting.
Winter, too, if one told of it — bird-slaying —
Such as, unbearable, Idaian snow brought —
Or heat, when waveless, on its noontide couches
Without a wind, the sea would slumber falling
— Why must one mourn these? O’er and gone is labour:
O’er and gone is it, even to those dead ones,
So that no more again they mind uprising.
Why must we tell in numbers those deprived ones,
And the live man be vexed with fate’s fresh outbreak?
Rather, I bid full farewell to misfortunes!
For us, the left from out the Argeian army,
The gain beats, nor does sorrow counterbalance.
So that ’t is fitly boasted of, this sunlight,
By us, o’er sea and land the aery flyers,
Such things men having heard must praise the city
And army-leaders: and the grace which wrought them —
Of Zeus, shall honoured be. Thou hast my whole word.
O’ercome by words, their sense I do not gainsay.
For, aye this breeds youth in the old —
But these things most the house and Klutaimnestra
Concern, ’t is likely: while they make me rich, too.
I shouted long ago, indeed, for joyance,
When came that first night-messenger of fire
Proclaiming
And someone, girding me, said,
By such words I was made seem wit-bewildered:
Yet still I sacrificed; and, — female-song with, —
A shout one man and other, through the city,
Set up, congratulating in the gods’ seats,
Soothing the incense-eating flame right fragrant.
And now, what’s more, indeed, why need’st thou tell me?
I of the king himself shall learn the whole word:
And, — as may best be, — I my revered husband
Shall hasten, as he comes back, to receive: for —
What’s to a wife sweeter to see than this light
(Her husband, by the god saved, back from warfare)
So as to open gates? This tell my husband —
To come at soonest to his loving city.
A faithful wife at home may he find, coming!
Such an one as he left — the dog o’ the household —
Trusty to him, adverse to the ill-minded,
And, in all else, the same: no signet-impress
Having done harm to, in that time’s duration.
I know nor pleasure, nor blameworthy converse
With any other man more than — bronze-dippings!
Such boast as this — brimful of the veracious —
Is, for a high-born dame, not bad to send forth!
Ay, she spoke thus to thee — that hast a knowledge
From clear interpreters — a speech most seemly.
But speak thou, herald! Meneleos I ask of:
If he, returning, back in safety also
Will come with you — this land’s beloved chieftain?
There’s no way I might say things false and pleasant
For friends to reap the fruits of through a long time.
How then if, speaking good, things true thou chance on?
For not well-hidden things become they, sundered.
The man has vanished from the Achaic army,
He and his ship too. I announce no falsehood.
Whether forth-putting openly from
Or did storm — wide woe — snatch him from the army?
Like topping bowman, thou hast touched the target,
And a long sorrow hast succinctly spoken.
Whether, then, of him, as a live or dead man
Was the report by other sailors bruited?
Nobody knows so as to tell out clearly
Excepting Helios who sustains earth’s nature.
How say’st thou then, did storm the naval army
Attack and end, by the celestials’ anger?
It suits not to defile a day auspicious
With ill-announcing speech: distinct each god’s due:
And when a messenger with gloomy visage
To a city bears a fall’n host’s woes— God ward off! —
One popular wound that happens to the city,
And many sacrificed from many households —
Men, scourged by that two-thonged whip Ares loves so,
Double spear-headed curse, bloody yoke-couple, —
Of woes like these, doubtless, whoe’er comes weighted,
Him does it suit to sing the Erinues’ paian.
But who, of matters saved a glad-news-bringer,
Comes to a city in good estate rejoicing. ...
How shall I mix good things with evil, telling
Of storm against the Achaioi, urged by gods’ wrath?
For they swore league, being arch-foes before that,
Fire and the sea: and plighted troth approved they,
Destroying the unhappy Argeian army.
At night began the bad-wave-outbreak evils;
For, ships against each other Threkian breezes
Shattered: and these, butted at in a fury
By storm and typhoon, with surge rain-resounding, —
Off they went, vanished, thro’ a bad herd’s whirling.
And, when returned the brilliant light of Helios,
We view the Aigaian sea on flower with corpses
Of men Achaian and with naval ravage.
But us indeed, and ship, unhurt i’ the hull too,
Either someone outstole us or outprayed us —
Some god — no man it was the tiller touching.
And Fortune, saviour, willing on our ship sat.
So as it neither had in harbour wave-surge
Nor ran aground against a shore all rocky.
And then, the water-Haides having fled from
In the white day, not trusting to our fortune,
We chewed the cud in thoughts — this novel sorrow
O’ the army labouring and badly pounded.
And now — if anyone of them is breathing —
They talk of us as having perished: why not?
And we — that they the same fate have, imagine.
May it be for the best! Meneleos, then,
Foremost and specially to come, expect thou!
If (that is) any ray o’ the sun reports him
Living and seeing too—by Zeus’ contrivings,
Not yet disposed to quite destroy the lineage —
Some hope is he shall come again to household.
Having heard such things, know, thou truth art hearing!
Who may he have been that named thus wholly with exactitude —
(Was he someone whom we see not, by forecastings of the future
Guiding tongue in happy mood?)
— Her with battle for a bridegroom, on all sides contention-wooed,
Helena? Since — mark the suture! —
Ship’s-Hell, Man’s-Hell, City’s-Hell,
From the delicately-pompous curtains that pavilion well,
Forth, by favour of the gale
Of earth-born Zephuros did she sail.
Many shield-bearers, leaders of the pack,
Sailed too upon their track,
Theirs who had directed oar,
Then visible no more,
To Simois’ leaf-luxuriant shore —
For sake of strife all gore!
First, indeed,
’T is right addressing — those with me the partners
In this return and right things done the city
Of Priamos: gods who, from no tongue hearing
The rights o’ the cause, for
Into the bloody vase, not oscillating,
Put the vote-pebbles, while, o’ the rival vessel,
Hope rose up to the lip-edge: filled it was not.
By smoke the captured city is still conspicuous:
Até’s burnt offerings live: and, dying with them,
The ash sends forth the fulsome blasts of riches.
Of these things, to the gods grace many-mindful
’T is right I render, since both nets outrageous
We built them round with, and, for sake of woman,
It did the city to dust — the Argeian monster,
The horse’s nestling, the shield-bearing people
That made a leap, at setting of the Pleiads,
And, vaulting o’er the tower, the raw-flesh-feeding
Lion licked up his fill of blood tyrannic.
I to the gods indeed prolonged this preface;
But — as for
I say the same, and thou co-pleader hast me.
Since few of men this faculty is born with —
To honour, without grudge, their friend, successful.
For moody, on the heart, a poison seated
Its burthen doubles to who gained the sickness:
By his own griefs he is himself made heavy,
And out-of-door prosperity seeing groans at.
Knowing, I’d call (for well have I experienced)
Those seeming to be mighty gracious to me:
While just Odusseus — he who sailed not willing —
When joined on, was to me the ready trace-horse.
This of him, whether dead or whether living,
I say. For other city-and-gods’ concernment —
Appointing common courts, in full assemblage
We will consult. And as for what holds seemly —
How it may lasting stay well, must be counselled:
While what has need of medicines Paionian
We, either burning or else cutting kindly,
Will make endeavour to turn pain from sickness.
And now into the domes and homes by altar
Going, I to the gods first raise the right-hand —
They who, far sending, back again have brought me.
And Victory, since she followed, fixed remain she!
Men, citizens, Argeians here, my worships!
I shall not shame me, consort-loving manners
To tell before you: for in time there dies off
The diffidence from people. Not from others
Learning, I of myself will tell the hard life
I bore so long as this man was ’neath
First: for a woman, from the male divided,
To sit at home alone, is monstrous evil —
Hearing the many rumours back-revenging:
And for now This to come, now That bring after
Woe, and still worse woe, bawling in the household!
And truly, if so many wounds had chanced on
My husband here, as homeward used to dribble
Report, he’s pierced more than a net to speak of!
While, were he dying (as the words abounded)
A triple-bodied Geruon the Second,
Plenty above — for loads below I count not —
Of earth a three-share cloak he’d boast of taking,
Once only dying in each several figure!
Because of suchlike rumours back-revenging,
Many the halters from my neck, above head,
Others than
From this cause, sure, the boy stands not beside me —
Possessor of our troth-plights, thine and mine too —
As ought Orestes: be not thou astonished!
For, him brings up our well-disposed guest-captive
Strophios the Phokian — ills that told on both sides
To me predicting — both of thee ’neath
The danger, and if anarchy’s mob-uproar
Should overthrow thy council; since ’t is born with
Mortals, — whoe’er has fallen, the more to kick him.
Such an excuse, I think, no cunning carries!
Offspring of Leda, of my household warder,
Suitably to my absence hast thou spoken,
For long the speech thou didst outstretch! But aptly
To praise — from others ought to go this favour.
And for the rest, —-not me, in woman’s fashion,
Mollify, nor — as mode of barbarous man is —
To me gape forth a groundward-falling clamour!
Nor, strewing it with garments, make my passage
Envied! Gods, sure, with these behoves we honour:
But, for a mortal on these varied beauties
To walk — to me, indeed, is nowise fear-free.
I say — as man, not god, to me do homage!
Apart from foot-mats both and varied vestures,
Renown is loud, and  —  not to lose one’s senses,
God’s greatest gift. Behoves we him call happy
Who has brought life to end in loved well-being.
If all things I might manage thus — brave man, I!
Come now, this say, nor feign a feeling to me!
With feeling, know indeed, I do not tamper!
Vowed’st thou to the gods, in fear, to act thus?
If any, I well knew resolve I outspoke.
What think’st thou Priamos had done, thus victor?
On varied vests — I do think — he had passaged.
Then, do not, struck with awe at human censure ....
Well, popular mob-outcry much avails too.
Ay, but the unenvied is not the much valued.
Sure, ’t is no woman’s part to long for battle.
Why, to the prosperous, even suits a beating.
What? thou this beating us in war dost prize too?
Persuade thee! power, for once, grant
But if this seem so to thee — shoes, let someone
Loose under, quick — foot’s serviceable carriage!
And me, on these sea-products walking, may no
Grudge from a distance, from the god’s eye, strike at!
For great shame were my strewment-spoiling — riches
Spoiling with feet, and silver-purchased textures!
Of these things, thus then. But this female-stranger
Tenderly take inside! Who conquers mildly
God, from afar, benignantly regardeth.
For, willing, no one wears a yoke that’s servile:
And she, of many valuables, outpicked
The flower, the army’s gift, myself has followed.
So, — since to hear thee, I am brought about thus, —
I go into the palace — purples treading.
There is the sea — and what man shall exhaust it? —
Feeding much purple’s worth-its-weight-in-silver
Dye, ever fresh and fresh, our garments’ tincture;
At home, such wealth, king, we begin — by gods’ help —
With having, and to lack, the household knows not.
Of many garments had I vowed a treading
(In oracles if fore-enjoined the household)
Of this dear soul the safe-return-price scheming!
For, root existing, foliage goes up houses,
O’erspreading shadow against Seirios dog-star;
And, thou returning to the hearth domestic,
Warmth, yea, in winter dost thou show returning.
And when, too, Zeus works, from the green-grape acrid,
Vine — then, already, cool in houses cometh —
The perfect man his home perambulating!
Zeus, Zeus Perfecter, these my prayers perfect thou!
Thy care be — yea — of things thou mayst make perfect!
Wherefore to me, this fear —
Groundedly stationed here
Fronting my heart, the portent-watcher — flits she?
Wherefore should prophet-play
The uncalled and unpaid lay,
Nor — having spat forth fear, like bad dreams — sits she
On the mind’s throne beloved — well-suasive Boldness?
For time, since, by a throw of all the hands,
The boat’s stern-cables touched the sands,
Has past from youth to oldness, —
When under
Take thyself in, thou too — I say, Kassandra!
Since Zeus — not angrily—in household placed thee
Partaker of hand-sprinklings, with the many
Slaves stationed, his the Owner’s altar close to.
Descend from out this car, nor be high-minded
And truly they do say Alkmené’s child once
Bore being sold, slaves’ barley-bread his living.
If, then, necessity of this lot o’erbalance,
Much is the favour of old-wealthy masters:
For those who, never hoping, made fine harvest
Are harsh to slaves in all things, beyond measure.
Thou hast — with us — such usage as law warrants.
To thee it was, she paused plain speech from speaking.
Being inside the fatal nets — obeying,
Thou mayst obey: but thou mayst disobey too!
Why, if she is not, in the swallow’s fashion,
Possessed of voice that’s unknown and barbaric,
I, with speech — speaking in mind’s scope — persuade her.
Follow! The best — as things now stand — she speaks of.
Obey thou, leaving this thy car-enthronement!
Well, with this thing at door, for me no leisure
To waste time: as concerns the hearth mid-navelled,
Already stand the sheep for fireside slaying
By those who never hoped to have such favour.
If thou, then, aught of this wilt do, delay not!
But if thou, being witless, tak’st no word in,
Speak thou, instead of voice, with hand as
She seems a plain interpreter in need of,
The stranger! and her way — a beast’s new-captured!
Why, she is mad, sure, — hears her own bad senses, —
Who, while she comes, leaving a town new-captured,
Yet knows not how to bear the bit o’ the bridle
Before she has out-frothed her bloody fierceness.
Not I — throwing away more words — will shamed be!
But I, — for I compassionate, — will chafe not.
Come, O unhappy one, this car vacating,
Yielding to this necessity, prove yoke’s use!
Otototoi, Gods, Earth, —
Apollon, Apollon!
Why didst thou
Since he is none such as to suit a mourner.
Otototoi, Gods, Earth, —
Apollon, Apollon!
Ill-boding here again the god invokes she
— Nowise empowered in woes to stand by helpful.
Apollon, Apollon,
Guard of the ways, my destroyer!
For thou hast quite, this second time, destroyed me.
To prophesy she seems of her own evils:
Remains the god-gift to the slave-soul present.
Apollon, Apollon,
Guard of the ways, my destroyer!
Ha, whither hast thou led me? to what roof now?
To the Atreidai’s roof: if this thou know’st not,
I tell it thee, nor this wilt thou call falsehood.
How! How!
God-hated, then! Of many a crime it knew —
Self-slaying evils, halters too:
Man’s-shambles, blood-besprinkler of the ground!
She seems to be good-nosed, the stranger: dog-like,
She snuffs indeed the victims she will find there.
How! How!
By the witnesses here I am certain now!
These children bewailing their slaughters — flesh dressed in the fire
And devoured by their sire!
Ay, we have heard of thy soothsaying glory,
Doubtless: but prophets none are we in scent of!
Ah, gods, what ever does she meditate?
What this new anguish great?
Great in the house here she meditates ill
Such as friends cannot bear, cannot cure it: and still
Off stands all Resistance
Afar in the distance!
Of these I witless am — these prophesyings.
But those I knew: for the whole city bruits them.
Ah, unhappy one, this thou consummatest?
Thy husband, thy bed’s common guest,
In the bath having brightened. .. How shall I declare
Consummation? It soon will be there:
For hand after hand she outstretches,
At life as she reaches!
Nor yet I’ve gone with thee! for — after riddles —
Now, in blind oracles, I feel resourceless.
Eh, eh, papai, papai,
What this, I espy?
Some net of Haides undoubtedly
Nay, rather, the snare
Is she who has share
In his bed, who takes part in the murder there!
But may a revolt —
Unceasing assault —
On the Race, raise a shout
Sacrificial, about
A victim — by stoning —
For murder atoning!
What this Erinus which i’ the house thou callest
To raise her cry? Not me thy word enlightens!
To my heart has run
A drop of the crocus-dye:
Which makes for those
On earth by the spear that lie,
A common close
With life’s descending sun.
Swift is the curse begun!
How! How!
See — see quick!
Keep the bull from the cow!
In the vesture she catching him, strikes him now
With the black-horned trick,
And he falls in the watery vase!
Of the craft-killing cauldron I tell thee the case!
I would not boast to be a topping critic
Of oracles: but to some sort of evil
I liken these. From oracles, what good speech
To mortals, beside, is sent?
It comes of their evils: these arts word-abounding that sing the event
Bring the fear’t is their office to teach.
Ah me, ah me —
Of me unhappy, evil-destined fortunes!
For I bewail my proper woe
As, mine with his, all into one I throw.
Why hast thou hither me unhappy brought?
— Unless that I should die with him — for nought!
What else was sought?
Thou art some mind-mazed creature, god-possessed:
And all about thyself dost wail
A lay — no lay!
Like some brown nightingale
Insatiable of noise, who — well-away! —
From her unhappy breast
Keeps moaning Itus, Itus, and his life
With evils, flourishing on each side, rife.
Ah me, ah me,
The fate o’ the nightingale, the clear resounder!
For a body wing-borne have the gods cast round her,
And sweet existence, from misfortunes free:
But for myself remains a sundering
With spear, the two-edged thing!
Whence hast thou this on-rushing god-involving pain
And spasms in vain?
For, things that terrify,
With changing unintelligible cry
Thou strikest up in tune, yet all the while
After that Orthian style!
Whence hast thou limits to the oracular road,
That evils bode?
Ah me, the nuptials, the nuptials of Paris, the deadly to friends!
Ah me, of Skamandros the draught
Paternal! There once, to these ends,
On thy banks was I brought,
The unhappy! And now, by Kokutos and Acheron’s shore
I shall soon be, it seems, these my oracles singing once more!
Why this word, plain too much,
Hast thou uttered? A babe might learn of such!
I am struck with a bloody bite — here under —
At the fate woe-wreaking
Of thee shrill shrieking:
To me who hear — a wonder!
Ah me, the toils — the toils of the city
The wholly destroyed: ah, pity,
Of the sacrificings my father made
In the ramparts’ aid —
Much slaughter of grass-fed flocks — that afforded no cure
That the city should not, as it does now, the burthen endure!
But I, with the soul on fire,
Soon to the earth shall cast me and expire.
To things, on the former consequent,
Again hast thou given vent:
And ’t is some evil-meaning fiend doth move thee,
Heavily falling from above thee,
To melodize thy sorrows — else, in singing,
Calamitous, death-bringing!
And of all this the end
I am without resource to apprehend
Well then, the oracle from veils no longer
Shall be outlooking, like a bride new-married:
But bright it seems, against the sun’s uprisings
Breathing, to penetrate thee: so as, wave-like,
To wash against the rays a woe much greater
Than this. I will no longer teach by riddles.
And witness, running with me, that of evils
Done long ago, I nosing track the footstep!
For, this same roof here — never quits a Choros
One-voiced, not well-tuned since no
And truly having drunk, to get more courage,
Man’s blood — the Komos keeps within the household
— Hard to be sent outside — of sister Furies:
They hymn their hymn — within the house close sitting —
The first beginning curse: in turn spit forth at
The Brother’s bed, to him who spurned it hostile.
Have I missed aught, or hit I like a bowman?
False prophet am I, — knock at doors, a babbler?
Henceforward witness, swearing now, I know not
By other’s word the old sins of this household!
And how should oath, bond honourably binding,
Become thy cure? No less I wonder at thee
— That thou, beyond sea reared, a strange-tongued city
Shouldst hit in speaking, just as if thou stood’st by!
Prophet Apollon put me in this office.
What, even though a god, with longing smitten?
At first, indeed, shame was to me to say this.
For, more relaxed grows everyone who fares well.
But he was athlete to me — huge grace breathing!
Well, to the work of children, went ye law’s way?
Having consented, I played false to Loxias.
Already when the wits inspired possessed of?
Already townsmen all their woes I foretold.
How wast thou then unhurt by Loxias’ anger?
I no one aught persuaded, when I sinned thus.
To us, at least, now sooth to say thou seemest.
Halloo, halloo, ah, evils!
Again, straightforward foresight’s fearful labour
Whirls me, distracting with prelusive last-lays!
Behold ye those there, in the household seated, —
Young ones, — of dreams approaching to the figures?
Children, as if they died by their beloveds —
Hands they have filled with flesh, the meal domestic —
Entrails and vitals both, most piteous burthen,
Plain they are holding! — which their father tasted!
For this, I say, plans punishment a certain
Lion ignoble, on the bed that wallows,
House-guard (ah, me!) to the returning master
— Mine, since to bear the slavish yoke behoves me!
The ship’s commander,
Knows not what things the tongue of the lewd she-dog
Speaking, outspreading, shiny-souled, in fashion
Of Até hid, will reach to, by ill fortune!
Such things she dares — the female, the male’s slayer!
She is . . . how calling her the hateful bite-beast
May I hit the mark? Some amphisbaina, — Skulla
Housing in rocks, of mariners the mischief,
Revelling Haides’ mother, — curse, no truce with,
Breathing at friends! How piously she shouted,
The all-courageous, as at turn of battle!
She seems to joy at the back-bringing safety!
Of this, too, if I nought persuade, all’s one! Why?
What is to be will come. And soon thou, present,
Thuestes’ feast, indeed, on flesh of children,
I went with, and I shuddered. Fear too holds me
Listing what’s true as life, nowise out-imaged.
I say, thou Agamemnon’s fate shalt look on.
Speak good words, O unhappy! Set mouth sleeping!
But Paian stands in no stead to the speech here.
Nay, if the thing be near: but never be it!
Thou, indeed, prayest: they to kill are busy.
Of what man is it ministered, this sorrow?
There again, wide thou look’st of my foretellings.
For, the fulfiller’s scheme I have not gone with.
And yet too well I know the speech Hellenic.
For Puthian oracles, thy speech, and hard too.
Papai: what fire this! and it comes upon me!
Ototoi, Lukeion Apollon, ah me — me!
She, the two-footed lioness that sleeps with
The wolf, in absence of the generous lion,
Kills me the unhappy one: and as a poison
Brewing, to put my price too in the anger,
She vows, against her mate this weapon whetting
To pay him back the bringing me, with slaughter.
Why keep I then these things to make me laughed at,
Both wands and, round my neck, oracular fillets?
Thee, at least, ere my own fate will I ruin:
Go, to perdition falling! Boons exchange we —
Some other Até in my stead make wealthy!
See there — himself, Apollon stripping from me
The oracular garment! having looked upon me
— Even in these adornments, laughed by friends at,
As good as foes, i’ the balance weighed: and vainly —
For, called crazed stroller, — as I had been gipsy,
Beggar, unhappy, starved to death, — I bore it.
And now the Prophet — prophet me undoing,
Has led away to these so deadly fortunes!
Instead of my sire’s altar, waits the hack-block
She struck with first warm bloody sacrificing!
Yet nowise unavenged of gods will death be:
For there shall come another, our avenger,
The mother-slaying scion, father’s doomsman:
Fugitive, wanderer, from this land an exile,
Back shall he come, — for friends, copestone these curses!
For there is sworn a great oath from the gods that
Him shall bring hither his fallen sire’s prostration.
Why make I then, like an indweller, moaning?
Since at the first I foresaw
Suffering as it has suffered: and who took it,
Thus by the judgment of the gods are faring.
I go, will suffer, will submit to dying!
But, Haides’ gates — these same I call, I speak to,
And pray that on an opportune blow chancing,
Without a struggle, — blood the calm death bringing
In easy outflow, — I this eye may close up!
O much unhappy, but, again, much learned
Woman, long hast thou outstretched! But if truly
Thou knowest thine own fate, how comes that, like to
A god-led steer, to altar bold thou treadest?
There’s no avoidance, — strangers, no some time more!
He last is, anyhow, by time advantaged.
It comes, the day: I shall by flight gain little.
But know thou patient art from thy brave spirit!
Such things hears no one of the happy-fortuned.
But gloriously to die — for man is grace, sure.
Ah, sire, for thee and for thy noble children!
But what thing is it? What fear turns thee backwards?
Alas, alas!
Why this
Slaughter blood-dripping does the household smell of!
How else? This scent is of hearth-sacrifices.
Such kind of steam as from a tomb is proper!
No Surian honour to the House thou speak’st of!
But I will go, — even in the household wailing
My fate and Agamemnon’s. Life suffice me!
Ah, strangers!
I cry not
Idly! to me, the dead this much bear witness:
When, for me — woman, there shall die a woman,
And, for a man ill-wived, a man shall perish!
This hospitality I ask as dying.
O sufferer, thee — thy foretold fate I pity.
Yet once for all, to speak a speech, I fain am:
No dirge, mine for myself! The sun I pray to,
Fronting his last light! — to my own avengers —
That from my hateful slayers they exact too
Pay for the dead slave — easy-managed hand’s work!
Alas for mortal matters! Happy-fortuned, —
Why, any shade would turn them: if unhappy,
By throws the wetting sponge has spoiled the picture!
And more by much in mortals this I pity.
The being well-to-do —
Insatiate a desire of this
Born with all mortals is,
Nor any is there who
Well-being forces off, aroints
From roofs whereat a finger points,
To take the city of Priamos did the celestials give,
And, honoured by the god, he homeward comes;
But now if, of the former, he shall pay
The blood back, and, for those who ceased to live,
Dying, for deaths in turn new punishment he dooms—
Who, being mortal, would not pray
With an unmischievous
Daimon to have been born — who would not, hearing thus?
Ah me! I am struck — a right-aimed stroke within me!
Silence! Who is it shouts
Ah me! indeed again, — a second, struck by!
This work seems to me completed by this
But we somehow may together share in solid counsellings.
I, in the first place, my opinion tell you:
— To cite the townsmen, by help-cry, to house here.
To me, it seems we ought to fall upon them
At quickest — prove the fact by sword fresh-flowing!
And I, of such opinion the partaker,
Vote — to do something: not to wait — the main point!
’T is plain to see: for they prelude as though of
A tyranny the signs they gave the city.
For we waste time; while they, — this waiting’s glory
Treading to ground, — allow the hand no slumber.
I know not — chancing on some plan — to tell it:
’T is for the doer to plan of the deed also.
And I am such another: since I’m schemeless
How to raise up again by words — a dead man!
What, and, protracting life, shall we give way thus
To the disgracers of our home, these rulers?
Why, ’t is unbearable: but to die is better:
For death than tyranny is the riper finish!
What, by the testifying
Shall we prognosticate the man as perished?
We must quite know ere speak these things concerning:
For to conjecture and
This same to praise I from all sides abound in —
Clearly to know — Atreides, what he’s doing!
Much having been before to purpose spoken,
The opposite to say I shall not shamed be:
For how should one, to enemies, — in semblance,
Friends, — enmity proposing, — sorrow’s net-frame
Enclose, a height superior to outleaping?
To me, indeed, this struggle of old — not mindless
Of an old victory — came: with time, I grant you!
I stand where I have struck, things once accomplished:
And so have done, — and this deny I shall not, —
As that his fate was nor to fly nor ward off.
A wrap-round with no outlet, as for fishes,
I fence about him — the rich woe of the garment:
I strike him twice, and in a double
He let his limbs go — there! And to him, fallen,
The third blow add I, giving — of Below-ground
Zeus, guardian of the dead — the votive favour.
Thus in the mind of him he rages, falling,
And blowing forth a brisk blood-spatter, strikes me
With the dark drop of slaughterous dew — rejoicing
No less than, at the god-given dewy-comfort,
The sown-stuff in its birth-throes from the calyx.
Since so these things are, — Argives, my revered here, —
Ye may rejoice — if ye rejoice: but I — boast!
If it were fit on corpse to pour libation,
That would be right — right over and above, too!
The cup of evils in the house he, having
Filled with such curses, himself coming drinks of.
We wonder at thy tongue: since bold-mouthed truly
Is she who in such speech boasts o’er her husband I
Ye test me as I were a witless woman:
But I — with heart intrepid — to you knowers
Say (and thou — if thou wilt or praise or blame me,
Comes to the same) — this man is Agamemnon,
My husband, dead, the work of the right hand here,
Ay, of a just artificer: so things are.
What evil, O woman, food or drink, earth-bred
Or sent from the flowing sea,
Of such having fed
Didst thou set on thee
This sacrifice
And popular cries
Of a curse on thy head?
Off thou hast thrown him, off hast cut
The man from the city: but —
Off from the city thyself shalt be
Cut — to the citizens
A hate immense!
Now, indeed, thou adjudgest exile to me,
And citizens’ hate, and to have popular curses:
Nothing of this against the man here bringing,
Who, no more awe-checked than as ’t were a beast’s fate, —
With sheep abundant in the well-fleeced graze-flocks, —
Sacrificed his child, — dearest fruit of travail
To me, — as song-spell against Threkian blowings.
Not him did it behove thee hence to banish
— Pollution’s penalty? But hearing mzy deeds
Justicer rough thou art! Now, this I tell thee:
To threaten thus — me, one prepared to have thee
(On like conditions, thy hand conquering) o’er me
Rule: but if God the opposite ordain us,
Thou shalt learn — late taught, certes — to be modest.
Greatly-intending thou art:
Much-mindful, too, hast thou cried
(Since thy mind, with its slaughter-outpouring part,
Is frantic) that over the eyes, a patch
Of blood — with blood to match —
Is plain for a pride!
Yet still, bereft of friends, thy fate
Is — blow with blow to expiate!
And this thou hearest — of my oaths, just warrant!
By who fulfilled things for my daughter, Justice,
Até, Erinus, — by whose help I slew him, —
Not mine the fancy — Fear will tread my palace
So long as on my hearth there burns a fire,
Aigisthos as before well-caring for me;
Since he to me is shield, no small, of boldness.
Here does he lie — outrager of this female,
Dainty of all the Chruseids under
And she — the captive, the soothsayer also
And couchmate of this man, oracle-speaker,
Faithful bed-fellow, — ay, the sailors’ benches
They wore in common, nor unpunished did so,
Since he is — thus! While, as for her, — swan-fashion,
Her latest having chanted, — dying wailing
She lies, — to him, a sweetheart: me she brought to —
My bed’s by-nicety — the whet of dalliance.
Alas, that some
Fate would come
Upon us in quickness —
Neither much sickness
Neither bed-keeping —
And bear unended sleeping,
Now that subdued
Is our keeper, the kindest of mood!
Having borne, for a woman’s sake, much strife —
By a woman he withered from life!
Nowise, of death the fate —
Burdened by these things — supplicate!
Nor on Helena turn thy wrath
As the man-destroyer, as
And wrought immense annoy!
Daimon, who fallest
Upon this household and the double-raced
Tantalidai, a rule, minded like theirs displaced,
Thou rulest me with, now,
Whose heart thou gallest!
And on the body, like a hateful crow,
Stationed, all out of tune, his chant to chant
Doth Something vaunt!
Now, of a truth, hast thou set upright
Thy mouth’s opinion, —
Naming the Sprite,
The triply gross,
O’er the race that has dominion:
For through him it is that Eros
The carnage-licker
In the belly is bred: ere ended quite
Is the elder throe — new ichor!
Certainly, great of might
And heavy of wrath, the Sprite
Thou tellest of, in the palace
(Woe, woe!)
— An evil tale of a fate
By Até’s malice
Rendered insatiate!
Thou boastest this deed to be mine:
But leave off styling me
For, showing himself in sign
Of the spouse of the corpse thou dost see,
Did the ancient bitter avenging-ghost
Of Atreus, savage host,
Pay the man here as price —
A full-grown for the young one’s sacrifice.
That no cause, indeed, of this killing art thou,
Who shall be witness-bearer?
How shall he bear it — how?
But the sire’s avenging-ghost might be in the deed a sharer.
He is forced on and on
By the kin-born flowing of blood,
— Black Ares: to where, having gone,
He shall leave off, flowing done,
At the frozen-child’s-flesh food.
No death
Do I think this man’s to be:
For did not himself a slavish curse
To his household decree?
But the scion of him, myself did nurse —
That much-bewailed Iphigeneia, he
Having done well by, — and as well, nor worse,
Been done to, — let him not in Haides loudly
Bear himself proudly!
Being by sword-destroying death amerced
For that sword’s punishment himself inflicted first.
I at a loss am left —
Of a feasible scheme of mind bereft —
Where I may turn: for the house is falling:
I fear the bloody crash of the rain
That ruins the roof as it bursts amain:
The warning-drop
Has come to a stop.
Destiny doth Justice whet
For other deed of hurt, on other whetstones yet.
It belongs not to thee to declare
This object of care!
By us did he fall — down there!
Did he die — down there! and down, no less,
We will bury him there, and not beneath
The wails of the household over his death:
But Iphigeneia, — with kindliness, —
His daughter, — as the case requires,
Facing him full, at the rapid-flowing
Passage of Groans shall — both hands throwing
Around him — kiss that kindest of sires!
This blame comes in the place of blame:
Hard battle it is to judge each claim.
And this remains while Zeus is remaining,
Who may cast out of the House its cursed brood?
The race is to Até glued!
Thou hast gone into this oracle
With a true result. For me, then, — I will
— To the Daimon of the Pleisthenidai
Making an oath — with all these things comply
Hard as they are to bear. For the rest —
Going from out this House, a guest,
May he wear some other family
To nought, with the deaths of kin by kin!
And, — keeping a little part of my goods, —
Wholly am I contented in
Having expelled from the royal House
These frenzied moods
The mutually-murderous.
O light propitious of day justice-bringing!
I may say truly, now, that men’s avengers,
The gods from high, of earth behold the sorrows —
Seeing, as I have, i’ the spun robes of the Erinues,
This man here lying, — sight to me how pleasant! —
His father’s hands’ contrivances repaying.
For Atreus, this land’s lord, of this man father,
Thuestes, my own father — to speak clearly —
His brother too, — being i’ the rule contested, —
Drove forth to exile from both town and household:
And, coming back, to the hearth turned, a suppliant,
Wretched Thuestes found the fate assured him
— Not to die, bloodying his paternal threshold
Just there: but host-wise this man’s impious father
Atreus, soul-keenly more than kindly, — seeming
To joyous hold a flesh-day, — to my father
Served up a meal, the flesh of his own children.
The feet indeed and the hands’ top divisions
He hid, high up and isolated sitting:
But, their unshowing parts in ignorance taking,
He forthwith eats food — as thou seest — perdition
To the race: and then, ’ware of the deed ill-omened,
He shrieked O! — falls back, vomiting, from the carnage,
And fate on the Pelopidai past bearing
He prays down — putting in his curse together
The kicking down o’ the feast — that so might perish
The race of Pleisthenes entire: and thence is
That it is given thee to see this man prostrate.
And I was rightly of this slaughter stitch-man:
Since me, — being third from ten, — with my poor father
He drives out — being then a babe in swathe-bands:
But, grown up, back again has justice brought me:
And of this man I got hold — being without-doors —
Fitting together the whole scheme of ill-will.
So, sweet, in fine, even to die were to me,
Seeing, as I have, this man i’ the toils of justice!
Aigisthos, arrogance in ills I love not.
Dost thou say — willing, thou didst kill the man here,
And, alone, plot this lamentable slaughter?
I say — thy head in justice will escape not
The people’s throwing — know that! — stones and curses!
Thou such things soundest — seated at the lower
Oarage to those who rule at the ship’s mid-bench?
Thou shalt know, being old, how heavy is teaching
To one of the like age — bidden be modest!
But chains and old age and the pangs of fasting
Stand out before all else in teaching, — prophets
At souls’-cure! Dost not, seeing aught, see this too?
Against goads kick not, lest tript-up thou suffer!
Woman, thou, — of him coming new from battle
Houseguard — thy husband’s bed the while disgracing, —
For the Army-leader didst thou plan this fate too?
These words too are of groans the prime-begetters!
Truly a tongue opposed to Orpheus hast thou:
Foi he led all things by his voice’s grace-charm,
But thou, upstirring them by these wild yelpings,
Wilt lead them! Forced, thou wilt appear the tamer!
So — thou shalt be my king then of the Argeians —
Who, not when for this man his fate thou plannedst,
Daredst to do this deed — thyself the slayer!
For, to deceive him was the wife’s part, certes:

But out of this man’s wealth will I endeavour
To rule the citizens: and the no-man-minder
— Him will I heavily yoke — by no means trace-horse,
A corned-up colt! but that bad friend in darkness,
Famine its housemate, shall behold him gentle.
Why then, this man here, from a coward spirit,
Didst not thou slay thyself? But, — helped, — a woman,
The country’s pest, and that of gods o’ the country,
Killed him! Orestes, where may he see light now?
That coming hither back, with gracious fortune,
Of both these he may be the all-conquering slayer?
But since this to do thou thinkest — and not talk — thou soon shalt know!
Up then, comrades dear! the proper thing to do—not distant this!
Up then! hilt in hold, his sword let everyone aright dispose!
Ay, but I myself too, hilt in hold, do not refuse to die.
Thou wilt die, thou say’st, to who accept it. We the chance demand.
Nowise, O belovedest of men, may we do other ills!
To have reaped away these, even, is a harvest much to me.
Go, both thou and these the old men, to the homes appointed each,
Ere ye suffer! It behoved one do these things just as we did:
And if of these troubles there should be enough — we may assent
— By the Daimon’s heavy heel unfortunately stricken ones!
So a woman’s counsel hath it — if one judge it learning-worth.
But to think that these at me the idle tongue should thus o’erbloom,
And throw out such words — the Daimon’s power experimenting on —
And, of modest knowledge missing, — me, the ruler, . . .
Ne’er may this befall Argeians — wicked man to fawn before!
Anyhow, in after days, will I, yes, I, be at thee yet!
Not if hither should the Daimon make Orestes straightway come!
O, I know, myself, that fugitives on hopes are pasture-fed!
Do thy deed, get fat, defiling justice, since the power is thine!
Know that thou shalt give me satisfaction for this folly’s sake!
Boast on, bearing thee audacious, like a cock his females by!
Have not thou respect for these same idle yelpings! I and thou
Will arrange it, o’er this household ruling excellently well.
